README.md, before:

# ITU-T Rec. P.1203 Standalone Implementation

**Disclaimer:** This software is not an official ITU-T publication. It has been verified in terms of performance in relation to the subjective test databases created by the authors of this software.

This evaluation software implements the following standards:

- ITU-T Rec. P.1203: Parametric bitstream-based quality assessment of progressive download and adaptive audiovisual streaming services over reliable transport
- ITU-T Rec. P.1203.1: Parametric bitstream-based quality assessment of progressive download and adaptive audiovisual streaming services over reliable transport - Video quality estimation module
- ITU-T Rec. P.1203.2: Parametric bitstream-based quality assessment of progressive download and adaptive audiovisual streaming services over reliable transport - Audio quality estimation module
- ITU-T Rec. P.1203.3: Parametric bitstream-based quality assessment of progressive download and adaptive audiovisual streaming services over reliable transport - Quality integration module

**News:**

- Version 1.6.0 fixes an issue with the final linearization (P.1203.3 Eq. 30) not being applied. Any calculations performed with earlier versions must be re-computed.
- Version 1.6.1 includes support for the P.1203.3 Amendment 1 "Adjustment of the audiovisual quality" which introduces an adjustment of the audiovisual quality of ITU-T P.1203.3 for the case of very low audio quality and long stalling events.
- Version 1.5.0 fixes an issue where mobile/handheld device scores were not correctly compensated for. Any calculations with device type "mobile" performed with versions <1.5.0 are therefore not valid and must be re-computed.

**Note:** An older version of the standard, ITU-T Rec. P.1203.3 (10/2017), contained an error in Eq. (20), where the exponential was calculated as `e^(t/(T/t_3))`. The correct formula should have read `e^(((t-1)/T)/t_3))`. This software reflects the correct interpretation of the equation, namely to normalize the timestamp by the total sequence duration (and not to divide the total sequence duration by the coefficient `t_3`). This has been updated in ITU-T Rec. P.1203.3 (01/19).

## General Description

The software takes the following input:

* One or more audiovisual files (segments), or
* A JSON-formatted input specification

Based on the input, it calculates per-second audio and video quality scores and an overall audiovisual integrated quality score according to the P.1203 standards. The following codecs are supported:

* Audio: AAC-LC, HE-AAC, MP2, AC3
* Video: H.264

When specifying the input, the software automatically decides which "mode" will be used for evaluation:

* Mode 0 (metadata only); bitrate, framerate, and resolution
* Mode 1 (frame header data only): all of mode 0 plus frame types and sizes
* Mode 2 (bitstream data, 2%): all of mode 1 plus 2% of the QP values of all frames
* Mode 3 (bitstream data, 100%): all of mode 1 plus QP values of all frames

The higher the mode, the higher the accuracy of the prediction.

## Requirements

* Python 3.7 or higher and `pip3`
  * Modern Linux distributions should come with Python 3. If not, [pyenv](https://github.com/pyenv/pyenv) is recommended to get a user-level Python 3 installation.
  * Under macOS, use [Homebrew](https://brew.sh/) and `brew install python` and read the printed messages.
  * For installation under Windows, please install Python from the official website

* Additional Python packages:
  * For running the software locally without pip, install the dependencies: `pip3 install --user -r requirements.txt`.
  * Under Windows, you can also download the requirements [here](https://www.lfd.uci.edu/~gohlke/pythonlibs/) and install the wheel for your architecture directly

* `ffprobe`/`ffmpeg` (only needed for Mode 3)
  * Download a static build from [ffmpeg](http://ffmpeg.org/download.html)
  * Place it in your `$PATH`

## Installation via `pip3`

From this directory, run:

    pip3 install .

Then you will get a `p1203-standalone` executable on your system. You can import the libraries with `itu_p1203` from Python.

You can uninstall the model with `pip3 uninstall itu_p1203`.

## CLI Usage

```
usage: p1203-standalone [-h] [-m {0,1,2,3}] [--debug] [--only-pa] [--only-pv] [--print-intermediate] [--cpu-count CPU_COUNT] [--version] [--accept-notice]
                   [--amendment-1-audiovisual] [--amendment-1-stalling]
                   input [input ...]

positional arguments:
  input                 input report JSON file(s) or video file(s), or STDIN if '-', format see README

optional arguments:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -m {0,1,2,3}, --mode {0,1,2,3}
                        mode to run for extraction in case video files are loaded (default: 1)
  --debug               some debug output (default: False)
  --only-pa             just print Pa O.21 values (default: False)
  --only-pv             just print Pv O.22 values (default: False)
  --print-intermediate  print intermediate O.21/O.22 values (default: False)
  --cpu-count CPU_COUNT
                        thread/CPU count (default: 8)
  --version             show program's version number and exit
  --accept-notice       accept license and acknowledgement terms (default: False)
  --amendment-1-audiovisual
                        enable audiovisual compensation from P.1203.3 Amendment 1 (default: False)
  --amendment-1-stalling
                        enable stalling compensation from P.1203.3 Amendment 1 (default: False)
```

The program will output a valid JSON report with the following structure:

```
{
  "path/to/first/input/file": {
    "O21": [
      # per-second audio quality scores (only if --print-intermediate was used)
    ],
    "O22": [
      # per-second video quality scores (only if --print-intermediate was used)
    ]
    "O23": 5.0,     # stalling quality
    "O34": [
      # per-second audiovisual quality scores
    ],
    "O35": 4.63,    # audiovisual quality score
    "O46": 4.92,    # overall quality score
    "mode": 0,      # used mode, either 0, 1, or 3
    "streamId": 42  # currently unused
  },
  "path/to/second/input/file": {
    ...
  }, ...
}
```

## Usage Examples

These examples assume direct usage from the source folder. If you installed the tool via `pip` you can just call `itu-p1203` with the needed options.

```
python3 -m itu_p1203 examples/mode0.json
```

Should output:

```json
{
 "examples/mode0.json": {
  "O23": 5.0,
  "O34": [5.0, 5.0, 5.0, 5.0, 5.0, 5.0, 5.0, 5.0, 5.0, 5.0, 5.0, 5.0, 5.0, 5.0, 5.0, 5.0, 5.0, 5.0, 5.0, 5.0],
  "O35": 5.0,
  "O46": 4.9209299083625,
  "mode": 0,
  "streamId": 42
 }
}
```

You can run video and audio-only evaluation, too:

```bash
python3 -m itu_p1203 examples/mode1.json --only-pv
```

```json
{
 "examples/mode1.json": {
  "video": {
   "O22": [3.6388673743323765, 3.6388673743323765, 3.6388673743323765, 3.6388673743323765, 3.6388673743323765, 3.9788927218578936, 3.9788927218578936, 3.9788927218578936, 3.9788927218578936, 3.9788927218578936, 4.391663023866462, 4.391663023866462, 4.391663023866462, 4.391663023866462, 4.391663023866462, 4.404242168691321, 4.404242168691321, 4.404242168691321, 4.404242168691321],
   "mode": 1,
   "streamId": 42
  }
 }
}
```

You can run it on video files directly:

```
python3 -m itu_p1203 segment-1.mp4 segment-2.mp4 --mode 1
```

## JSON Input Format

The input JSON file (see files in `examples`) must have at least the following data:

```
{
"I13": {              # video input information
    "streamId": 42,   # unique identifier for the stream
    "segments": [
      # list of video segments, see below
    ]
  }
}
```

The following keys and data are optional:

```
"IGen": {                         # Generic input information
    "displaySize": "1920x1080",   # display resolution in pixels, given as `<width>x<height>`
    "device": "pc",               # pc, handheld, or mobile
    "viewingDistance": 0,         # not used
  }
"I11": {              # Audio input information
    "streamId": 42,   # unique identifier for the stream
    "segments": [
      # list of audio segments, see below
    ]
  }
"I23": {              # Stalling input information
    "streamId": 42,   # unique identifier for the stream
    "stalling": [
      # pair of `[start timestamp, duration]` for each stalling event
      # where the start timestamp is measured in media time
    ]
  }
}
```

Note:

- All timestamps are in media time
- All timestamps are given as seconds (with optional fractional seconds)

As an alternative to giving segment information, the input can also be a list of O.21 (audio) and O.22 (video) quality scores, e.g. from other calculations. See `examples/existing_O21_O22.json` for an example.

### JSON Audio Input Format

For audio, `segments` contains a list of audio segments to be analyzed. Each segment is defined by the following dictionary:

```
{
  "codec": "aaclc",   # audio codec, any of [mp2, ac3, aaclc, heaac]
  "start": 0.0,       # media start timestamp
  "duration": 5.0,    # duration
  "bitrate": 192.0    # bitrate in kBit/s
}
```

### JSON Video Input Format

For video, `segments` contains a list of video segments to be analyzed. Each segment is defined by the following dictionary, depending on the mode:

```
{
  "codec": "h264",       # only "h264" supported in standard
  "start": 0.0,          # media start timestamp in s
  "duration": 5.0,       # duration in s
  "resolution": "1920x1080",    # resolution as "widthxheight", e.g. "1920x1080"
  "bitrate": 5000,       # bitrate in kBit/s
  "fps": 24,             # framerate
  "representation": 1,   # representation ID / media quality level ID (optional)
  "frames": [
    # optional list of frames
    # when present, will enable modes 1, 2 or 3
  ]
}
```

The `representation` key is equal to the *Media Quality Level* ID as defined in P.1203. If present, switching the representation will flush the measurement window as defined in Clause 7.4 of the standard. If not, the tuple bitrate, framerate, and resolution are considered to be a unique identifier of the representation.

The list of frames contains every frame in the sequence, in decoding order. The object contents depend on the mode, and the software figures out automatically which mode to calculate:

```
{
  "frameType": "I",     # I/Non-I, or I/P/B
  "frameSize": 18102,   # in Bytes
  "qpValues": [
    # optional list of QP values in frame, one per macroblock
    # when present, will enable mode 3 (mode 2 will never be enabled automatically)
  ]
}
```

## Advanced: Input Generation with `ffprobe`

If you have `ffprobe` installed, you can generate the required input file from one or more video segments by using the `itu_p1203/extractor.py` script. For example:

```bash
python3 -m itu_p1203.extractor -m 1 /path/to/segment1.mp4 /path/to/segment2.mp4 > mode1.json
```

This is what the `itu_p1203` script does in the background if you call it with a video file as argument.

For extracting Mode 3 values, you need the [`ffmpeg-debug-qp`](https://github.com/slhck/ffmpeg-debug-qp) executable installed. **Note:** This procedure is experimental and may not work with all input video files, hence cannot be used to validate an existing implementation.

See `itu_p1203/extractor.py -h` for more info.

## API Usage

You can use the classes contained in this module to programmatically call the model in your test application. For example:

```python
from itu_p1203 import P1203Standalone
from itu_p1203 import P1203Pq
from itu_p1203 import P1203Pa
from itu_p1203 import P1203Pv

P1203Standalone(input_json).calculate_complete()

P1203Pa(segments).calculate()

P1203Pq(audio_scores, video_scores).calculate()

P1203Pv.video_model_function_mode0(
  coding_res=1920*1080,
  display_res=1920*1080,
  bitrate_kbps_segment_size=1500,
  framerate=24
)
```

For more, see the example usage in `itu_p1203/__main__.py`.

## Extensions

For evaluation of non-standard codecs (H.265/HEVC or VP9), you can use the [extension provided by TU Ilmenau](https://github.com/Telecommunication-Telemedia-Assessment/itu-p1203-codecextension).

## Acknowledgement

If you use this software, or derivates of it, in your research, you must:

1. Include the link to this repository
2. Cite the following publications:

   Raake, A., Garcia, M.-N., Robitza, W., List, P., Göring, S., Feiten, B. (2017). A bitstream-based, scalable video-quality model for HTTP adaptive streaming: ITU-T P.1203.1. In 2017 Ninth International Conference on Quality of Multimedia Experience (QoMEX). Erfurt.

        @inproceedings{Raake2017,
        address = {Erfurt},
        author = {Raake, Alexander and Garcia, Marie-Neige and Robitza, Werner and List, Peter and Göring, Steve and Feiten, Bernhard},
        booktitle = {Ninth International Conference on Quality of Multimedia Experience (QoMEX)},
        doi = {10.1109/QoMEX.2017.7965631},
        isbn = {978-1-5386-4024-1},
        month = {May},
        publisher = {IEEE},
        title = {{A bitstream-based, scalable video-quality model for HTTP adaptive streaming: ITU-T P.1203.1}},
        url = {http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7965631/},
        year = {2017}
        }

    Robitza, W., Göring, S., Raake, A., Lindegren, D., Heikkilä, G., Gustafsson, J., List, P., Feiten, B., Wüstenhagen, U., Garcia, M.-N., Yamagishi, K., Broom, S. (2018). HTTP Adaptive Streaming QoE Estimation with ITU-T Rec. P.1203 – Open Databases and Software. In 9th ACM Multimedia Systems Conference. Amsterdam.

        @inproceedings{Robitza2018,
        address = {Amsterdam},
        author = {Robitza, Werner and Göring, Steve and Raake, Alexander and Lindegren, David and Heikkilä, Gunnar and Gustafsson, Jörgen and List, Peter and Feiten, Bernhard and Wüstenhagen, Ulf and Garcia, Marie-Neige and Yamagishi, Kazuhisa and Broom, Simon},
        booktitle = {9th ACM Multimedia Systems Conference},
        doi = {10.1145/3204949.3208124},
        isbn = {9781450351928},
        title = {{HTTP Adaptive Streaming QoE Estimation with ITU-T Rec. P.1203 – Open Databases and Software}},
        year = {2018}
        }

Development of this software has been partly funded by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement No 643072, Project [QoE-Net](http://www.qoenet-itn.eu/).

## License

Copyright 2017-2018 Deutsche Telekom AG, Technische Universität Berlin, Technische Universität Ilmenau, LM Ericsson

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to use the software for non-commercial research purposes.

Any other use of the software, including commercial use, merging, publishing, distributing, sublicensing, and/or selling copies of the Software, is forbidden.

For a commercial license, you must contact the respective rights holders of the standards ITU-T Rec. P.1203, ITU-T Rec. P.1203.1, ITU-T Rec. P.1203.2, and ITU-T Rec. P.1203.3. See https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-T/ipr/Pages/default.aspx for more information.

NO EXPRESS OR IMPLIED LICENSES TO ANY PARTY'S PATENT RIGHTS ARE GRANTED BY THIS LICENSE. THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

## Authors

Main developers:

* Steve Göring, Technische Universität Ilmenau
* Werner Robitza, Technische Universität Ilmenau

Contributors:

* Marie-Neige Garcia, Technische Universität Berlin
* Alexander Raake, Technische Universität Ilmenau
* Marcel Schmalzl, Technische Universität Ilmenau
* Peter List, Deutsche Telekom AG
* Bernhard Feiten, Deutsche Telekom AG
* Ulf Wüstenhagen, Deutsche Telekom AG
* Jörgen Gustafsson, LM Ericsson
* Gunnar Heikkilä, LM Ericsson
* David Lindegren, LM Ericsson
* Junaid Shaikh, LM Ericsson

Commit message:

add example for running extractor for mode 3

README.md, after:

# ITU-T Rec. P.1203 Standalone Implementation

**Disclaimer:** This software is not an official ITU-T publication. It has been verified in terms of performance in relation to the subjective test databases created by the authors of this software.

This evaluation software implements the following standards:

- ITU-T Rec. P.1203: Parametric bitstream-based quality assessment of progressive download and adaptive audiovisual streaming services over reliable transport
- ITU-T Rec. P.1203.1: Parametric bitstream-based quality assessment of progressive download and adaptive audiovisual streaming services over reliable transport - Video quality estimation module
- ITU-T Rec. P.1203.2: Parametric bitstream-based quality assessment of progressive download and adaptive audiovisual streaming services over reliable transport - Audio quality estimation module
- ITU-T Rec. P.1203.3: Parametric bitstream-based quality assessment of progressive download and adaptive audiovisual streaming services over reliable transport - Quality integration module

**News:**

- Version 1.6.0 fixes an issue with the final linearization (P.1203.3 Eq. 30) not being applied. Any calculations performed with earlier versions must be re-computed.
- Version 1.6.1 includes support for the P.1203.3 Amendment 1 "Adjustment of the audiovisual quality" which introduces an adjustment of the audiovisual quality of ITU-T P.1203.3 for the case of very low audio quality and long stalling events.
- Version 1.5.0 fixes an issue where mobile/handheld device scores were not correctly compensated for. Any calculations with device type "mobile" performed with versions <1.5.0 are therefore not valid and must be re-computed.

**Note:** An older version of the standard, ITU-T Rec. P.1203.3 (10/2017), contained an error in Eq. (20), where the exponential was calculated as `e^(t/(T/t_3))`. The correct formula should have read `e^(((t-1)/T)/t_3))`. This software reflects the correct interpretation of the equation, namely to normalize the timestamp by the total sequence duration (and not to divide the total sequence duration by the coefficient `t_3`). This has been updated in ITU-T Rec. P.1203.3 (01/19).

## General Description

The software takes the following input:

* One or more audiovisual files (segments), or
* A JSON-formatted input specification

Based on the input, it calculates per-second audio and video quality scores and an overall audiovisual integrated quality score according to the P.1203 standards. The following codecs are supported:

* Audio: AAC-LC, HE-AAC, MP2, AC3
* Video: H.264

When specifying the input, the software automatically decides which "mode" will be used for evaluation:

* Mode 0 (metadata only); bitrate, framerate, and resolution
* Mode 1 (frame header data only): all of mode 0 plus frame types and sizes
* Mode 2 (bitstream data, 2%): all of mode 1 plus 2% of the QP values of all frames
* Mode 3 (bitstream data, 100%): all of mode 1 plus QP values of all frames

The higher the mode, the higher the accuracy of the prediction.

## Requirements

* Python 3.7 or higher and `pip3`
  * Modern Linux distributions should come with Python 3. If not, [pyenv](https://github.com/pyenv/pyenv) is recommended to get a user-level Python 3 installation.
  * Under macOS, use [Homebrew](https://brew.sh/) and `brew install python` and read the printed messages.
  * For installation under Windows, please install Python from the official website

* Additional Python packages:
  * For running the software locally without pip, install the dependencies: `pip3 install --user -r requirements.txt`.
  * Under Windows, you can also download the requirements [here](https://www.lfd.uci.edu/~gohlke/pythonlibs/) and install the wheel for your architecture directly

* `ffprobe`/`ffmpeg` (only needed for Mode 3)
  * Download a static build from [ffmpeg](http://ffmpeg.org/download.html)
  * Place it in your `$PATH`

## Installation via `pip3`

From this directory, run:

    pip3 install .

Then you will get a `p1203-standalone` executable on your system. You can import the libraries with `itu_p1203` from Python.

You can uninstall the model with `pip3 uninstall itu_p1203`.

## CLI Usage

```
usage: p1203-standalone [-h] [-m {0,1,2,3}] [--debug] [--only-pa] [--only-pv] [--print-intermediate] [--cpu-count CPU_COUNT] [--version] [--accept-notice]
                   [--amendment-1-audiovisual] [--amendment-1-stalling]
                   input [input ...]

positional arguments:
  input                 input report JSON file(s) or video file(s), or STDIN if '-', format see README

optional arguments:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -m {0,1,2,3}, --mode {0,1,2,3}
                        mode to run for extraction in case video files are loaded (default: 1)
  --debug               some debug output (default: False)
  --only-pa             just print Pa O.21 values (default: False)
  --only-pv             just print Pv O.22 values (default: False)
  --print-intermediate  print intermediate O.21/O.22 values (default: False)
  --cpu-count CPU_COUNT
                        thread/CPU count (default: 8)
  --version             show program's version number and exit
  --accept-notice       accept license and acknowledgement terms (default: False)
  --amendment-1-audiovisual
                        enable audiovisual compensation from P.1203.3 Amendment 1 (default: False)
  --amendment-1-stalling
                        enable stalling compensation from P.1203.3 Amendment 1 (default: False)
```

The program will output a valid JSON report with the following structure:

```
{
  "path/to/first/input/file": {
    "O21": [
      # per-second audio quality scores (only if --print-intermediate was used)
    ],
    "O22": [
      # per-second video quality scores (only if --print-intermediate was used)
    ]
    "O23": 5.0,     # stalling quality
    "O34": [
      # per-second audiovisual quality scores
    ],
    "O35": 4.63,    # audiovisual quality score
    "O46": 4.92,    # overall quality score
    "mode": 0,      # used mode, either 0, 1, or 3
    "streamId": 42  # currently unused
  },
  "path/to/second/input/file": {
    ...
  }, ...
}
```

## Usage Examples

These examples assume direct usage from the source folder. If you installed the tool via `pip` you can just call `itu-p1203` with the needed options.

```
python3 -m itu_p1203 examples/mode0.json
```

Should output:

```json
{
 "examples/mode0.json": {
  "O23": 5.0,
  "O34": [5.0, 5.0, 5.0, 5.0, 5.0, 5.0, 5.0, 5.0, 5.0, 5.0, 5.0, 5.0, 5.0, 5.0, 5.0, 5.0, 5.0, 5.0, 5.0, 5.0],
  "O35": 5.0,
  "O46": 4.9209299083625,
  "mode": 0,
  "streamId": 42
 }
}
```

You can run video and audio-only evaluation, too:

```bash
python3 -m itu_p1203 examples/mode1.json --only-pv
```

```json
{
 "examples/mode1.json": {
  "video": {
   "O22": [3.6388673743323765, 3.6388673743323765, 3.6388673743323765, 3.6388673743323765, 3.6388673743323765, 3.9788927218578936, 3.9788927218578936, 3.9788927218578936, 3.9788927218578936, 3.9788927218578936, 4.391663023866462, 4.391663023866462, 4.391663023866462, 4.391663023866462, 4.391663023866462, 4.404242168691321, 4.404242168691321, 4.404242168691321, 4.404242168691321],
   "mode": 1,
   "streamId": 42
  }
 }
}
```

You can run it on video files directly:

```
python3 -m itu_p1203 segment-1.mp4 segment-2.mp4 --mode 1
```

## JSON Input Format

The input JSON file (see files in `examples`) must have at least the following data:

```
{
"I13": {              # video input information
    "streamId": 42,   # unique identifier for the stream
    "segments": [
      # list of video segments, see below
    ]
  }
}
```

The following keys and data are optional:

```
"IGen": {                         # Generic input information
    "displaySize": "1920x1080",   # display resolution in pixels, given as `<width>x<height>`
    "device": "pc",               # pc, handheld, or mobile
    "viewingDistance": 0,         # not used
  }
"I11": {              # Audio input information
    "streamId": 42,   # unique identifier for the stream
    "segments": [
      # list of audio segments, see below
    ]
  }
"I23": {              # Stalling input information
    "streamId": 42,   # unique identifier for the stream
    "stalling": [
      # pair of `[start timestamp, duration]` for each stalling event
      # where the start timestamp is measured in media time
    ]
  }
}
```

Note:

- All timestamps are in media time
- All timestamps are given as seconds (with optional fractional seconds)

As an alternative to giving segment information, the input can also be a list of O.21 (audio) and O.22 (video) quality scores, e.g. from other calculations. See `examples/existing_O21_O22.json` for an example.

### JSON Audio Input Format

For audio, `segments` contains a list of audio segments to be analyzed. Each segment is defined by the following dictionary:

```
{
  "codec": "aaclc",   # audio codec, any of [mp2, ac3, aaclc, heaac]
  "start": 0.0,       # media start timestamp
  "duration": 5.0,    # duration
  "bitrate": 192.0    # bitrate in kBit/s
}
```

### JSON Video Input Format

For video, `segments` contains a list of video segments to be analyzed. Each segment is defined by the following dictionary, depending on the mode:

```
{
  "codec": "h264",       # only "h264" supported in standard
  "start": 0.0,          # media start timestamp in s
  "duration": 5.0,       # duration in s
  "resolution": "1920x1080",    # resolution as "widthxheight", e.g. "1920x1080"
  "bitrate": 5000,       # bitrate in kBit/s
  "fps": 24,             # framerate
  "representation": 1,   # representation ID / media quality level ID (optional)
  "frames": [
    # optional list of frames
    # when present, will enable modes 1, 2 or 3
  ]
}
```

The `representation` key is equal to the *Media Quality Level* ID as defined in P.1203. If present, switching the representation will flush the measurement window as defined in Clause 7.4 of the standard. If not, the tuple bitrate, framerate, and resolution are considered to be a unique identifier of the representation.

The list of frames contains every frame in the sequence, in decoding order. The object contents depend on the mode, and the software figures out automatically which mode to calculate:

```
{
  "frameType": "I",     # I/Non-I, or I/P/B
  "frameSize": 18102,   # in Bytes
  "qpValues": [
    # optional list of QP values in frame, one per macroblock
    # when present, will enable mode 3 (mode 2 will never be enabled automatically)
  ]
}
```

## Advanced: Input Generation with `ffprobe`

If you have `ffprobe` installed, you can generate the required input file from one or more video segments by using the `itu_p1203/extractor.py` script. For example:

```bash
python3 -m itu_p1203.extractor -m 1 /path/to/segment1.mp4 /path/to/segment2.mp4 > mode1.json
```

This is what the `itu_p1203` script does in the background if you call it with a video file as argument.

For extracting Mode 3 values, you need the [`ffmpeg-debug-qp`](https://github.com/slhck/ffmpeg-debug-qp) executable installed. Then you can extract the QP values directly:

```bash
python3 -m itu_p1203.extractor --use-average -m 3 /path/to/segment1.mp4 /path/to/segment2.mp4 > mode3.json
```

**Note:** This procedure is experimental and may not work with all input video files, hence cannot be used to validate an existing implementation.

See `itu_p1203/extractor.py -h` for more info.

## API Usage

You can use the classes contained in this module to programmatically call the model in your test application. For example:

```python
from itu_p1203 import P1203Standalone
from itu_p1203 import P1203Pq
from itu_p1203 import P1203Pa
from itu_p1203 import P1203Pv

P1203Standalone(input_json).calculate_complete()

P1203Pa(segments).calculate()

P1203Pq(audio_scores, video_scores).calculate()

P1203Pv.video_model_function_mode0(
  coding_res=1920*1080,
  display_res=1920*1080,
  bitrate_kbps_segment_size=1500,
  framerate=24
)
```

For more, see the example usage in `itu_p1203/__main__.py`.

## Extensions

For evaluation of non-standard codecs (H.265/HEVC or VP9), you can use the [extension provided by TU Ilmenau](https://github.com/Telecommunication-Telemedia-Assessment/itu-p1203-codecextension).

## Acknowledgement

If you use this software, or derivates of it, in your research, you must:

1. Include the link to this repository
2. Cite the following publications:

   Raake, A., Garcia, M.-N., Robitza, W., List, P., Göring, S., Feiten, B. (2017). A bitstream-based, scalable video-quality model for HTTP adaptive streaming: ITU-T P.1203.1. In 2017 Ninth International Conference on Quality of Multimedia Experience (QoMEX). Erfurt.

        @inproceedings{Raake2017,
        address = {Erfurt},
        author = {Raake, Alexander and Garcia, Marie-Neige and Robitza, Werner and List, Peter and Göring, Steve and Feiten, Bernhard},
        booktitle = {Ninth International Conference on Quality of Multimedia Experience (QoMEX)},
        doi = {10.1109/QoMEX.2017.7965631},
        isbn = {978-1-5386-4024-1},
        month = {May},
        publisher = {IEEE},
        title = {{A bitstream-based, scalable video-quality model for HTTP adaptive streaming: ITU-T P.1203.1}},
        url = {http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7965631/},
        year = {2017}
        }

    Robitza, W., Göring, S., Raake, A., Lindegren, D., Heikkilä, G., Gustafsson, J., List, P., Feiten, B., Wüstenhagen, U., Garcia, M.-N., Yamagishi, K., Broom, S. (2018). HTTP Adaptive Streaming QoE Estimation with ITU-T Rec. P.1203 – Open Databases and Software. In 9th ACM Multimedia Systems Conference. Amsterdam.

        @inproceedings{Robitza2018,
        address = {Amsterdam},
        author = {Robitza, Werner and Göring, Steve and Raake, Alexander and Lindegren, David and Heikkilä, Gunnar and Gustafsson, Jörgen and List, Peter and Feiten, Bernhard and Wüstenhagen, Ulf and Garcia, Marie-Neige and Yamagishi, Kazuhisa and Broom, Simon},
        booktitle = {9th ACM Multimedia Systems Conference},
        doi = {10.1145/3204949.3208124},
        isbn = {9781450351928},
        title = {{HTTP Adaptive Streaming QoE Estimation with ITU-T Rec. P.1203 – Open Databases and Software}},
        year = {2018}
        }

Development of this software has been partly funded by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement No 643072, Project [QoE-Net](http://www.qoenet-itn.eu/).

## License

Copyright 2017-2018 Deutsche Telekom AG, Technische Universität Berlin, Technische Universität Ilmenau, LM Ericsson

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to use the software for non-commercial research purposes.

Any other use of the software, including commercial use, merging, publishing, distributing, sublicensing, and/or selling copies of the Software, is forbidden.

For a commercial license, you must contact the respective rights holders of the standards ITU-T Rec. P.1203, ITU-T Rec. P.1203.1, ITU-T Rec. P.1203.2, and ITU-T Rec. P.1203.3. See https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-T/ipr/Pages/default.aspx for more information.

NO EXPRESS OR IMPLIED LICENSES TO ANY PARTY'S PATENT RIGHTS ARE GRANTED BY THIS LICENSE. THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

## Authors

Main developers:

* Steve Göring, Technische Universität Ilmenau
* Werner Robitza, Technische Universität Ilmenau

Contributors:

* Marie-Neige Garcia, Technische Universität Berlin
* Alexander Raake, Technische Universität Ilmenau
* Marcel Schmalzl, Technische Universität Ilmenau
* Peter List, Deutsche Telekom AG
* Bernhard Feiten, Deutsche Telekom AG
* Ulf Wüstenhagen, Deutsche Telekom AG
* Jörgen Gustafsson, LM Ericsson
* Gunnar Heikkilä, LM Ericsson
* David Lindegren, LM Ericsson
* Junaid Shaikh, LM Ericsson
